Abstract
This paper aims at presenting a compilation of state-of art references in which dynamic programming (DP) and its variants have been applied as a solution methods for the deterministic machine scheduling problems. Overall, 183 articles have been gathered and their segmentation was carried out according to the machine environment that characterized the problems addressed by the authors and ultimately, the objective functions that were intended to be optimized. Additionally, we standardized the information provided by each article by presenting the problems discussed by the authors, comparisons between previous works on the same problem (if it was deemed necessary), the algorithms’ complexities and an extension of methods to computational experiments (in case they have been stated). Finally, at the end of each section we furnish a discussion on the main contributions of DP to the each environment and also suggest some further applications of DP to machine scheduling problems, thus showing the potential resources that can be derived from the method in terms of theoretical/practical approaches.
Introduction
Pinedo (2012) defines machine scheduling as the allocation of machines to a set of jobs whose objective is to establish the ordering that returns an optimal value for a given objective function. All these functions are usually denoted as criteria or performance measures and they are often described as time functions. Although this may seem a theoretical description of the problem, one must acknowledge its relevance, since it is related to several manufacturing scenarios and the optimization of such problem and variations of it are one of the pillars to place a company ahead in terms of competitiveness and efficiency regarding the production process.
Fuchigami and Rangel (2018) describe thoroughly the applications of machine scheduling in several segments of industry, such as chemical, printed circuits, clothing, iron and steel, pharmaceutical and furniture, among others. Their analysis is recent and therefore, it can be accurate about the trends in machine scheduling over the last 20 years. An interesting fact of their research is the discussion of the methods that have been currently employed in the solution of the various problems related to scheduling and from a general standpoint, one can notice that 71.19% of the articles gathered cover heuristics and metaheuristics as solution methods. This leads to a much smaller contribution of exact methods and, even though the authors have only taken into account MILP, the participation of other methods cannot be compared to MILP, since it is one of the most common methods when contrasting performances among algorithms.
Recently, a review presented by Tomazella and Nagano (2020) lists articles in which Branch and Bound (B&B) is exploited as a solution method for the flow shop environment with numerous evidences that this method, only for this flow pattern has been repeatedly employed. The same can be stated for less complex environments (e.g. single machine and parallel machines). However, when comparing the shares of MILP and B&B with other exact methods, it is noticeable that the former are recurrent options for the authors, even when being programmed in order to verify the efficiency of some non-exact methods and therefore, the use of other exact methods became less frequent over time, as it is the case of Dynamic Programming (DP).
The foundations of DP can be traced back to the fifties and the first topics related to it are found in Bellman (1952) with the introduction of a class of problems whose aim is to seek an optimal set of choices which, in turn, would lead to an optimal solution. Such class had been originally presented for an stochastic framework and the author focused on outlining the Existence and Uniqueness Theorem for the problem described and its relation to a functional equation. A subsequent work is developed in Bellman et al. (1954), which extended the previous notion of probabilistic nature to the deterministic case and then, consolidated DP as an exact method used to solve optimization problems. Furthermore, the definition of DP is presented and according to the authors it can be defined as a method that divides an original problem into sub-problems of smaller dimensions by choosing, at every step, the set of decisions that returns the best result in terms of a given objective function. Such function is essentially modeled via a recursive relation (functional equation) that will ultimately generate the optimal solution for the original problem as previous solutions are aggregated.
Hereafter, the communication between DP and several classic problems of Operations Research has been established. Held and Karp (1962) are probably one of the most revisited authors regarding this connection and they show how to employ DP to a general scheduling problem by developing a recursive relation that is dependent of time and whose objective is to obtain the sequence that minimizes the time the jobs remain on the system. Although the resources used in this paper might be outdated, it is deemed a stepping stone for DP and machine scheduling, once it is able to demonstrate its applicability to such problem and originate derived methods of DP that have enabled improvements for particular scenarios over time.
The premises for employing DP are completely compatible with the structure of machine scheduling problems, once the problem of finding an optimal sequence can be partitioned into sub-problems that stores partial sequences until the original problem is solved and the value of the objective function can be obtained through a specific functional equation. Throughout time, DP has been diversified in scheduling and, despite not being the most applied method regarding this problem in Operations Research, its contribution can be considered substantial to the development of the machine scheduling field. Some of the contributions are: development of polynomial time algorithms (Moore, 1968, Potts and Van Wassenhove, 1982) that are still widely applied in contemporary approaches for scheduling problems, methods to reduce the state–space inherent to the DP recursive relations (Baker, 1977, Lawler, 1977, Schrage and Baker, 1978), theoretical background for generation of a large class of fully polynomial time approximation schemes (Woeginger, 2000), creation of methods derived from the original DP features (Ozolins, 2019b, Tanaka and Fujikuma, 2012), among others.
This paper aims at compiling state-of-art references that relate Dynamic Programming and machine scheduling to motivate researchers that are interested in studying the connection between these two topics or those that intend to analyze the evolution of DP, its achievements and potential capabilities. Despite DP being considered a method that might be strongly associated with issues especially for NP-hard problems, as it is the case of most of scheduling literature, one of the objectives of this paper is to show the applications of DP via derived methods, which may include approximation schemes and other efficient heuristics. With that said, we can demonstrate the branches of DP in scheduling and their importance for future perspectives. We also attempt to associate complexities regarding the problem and the algorithms whenever it is given, once those are indicators of improvements in the tractability of combinatorial problems. Furthermore, the paper includes the most recent applications of DP to develop either theoretical analysis or practical algorithms. It also presents the last trends of DP as well as the gaps in the current literature. Lastly, this paper suggests promising methods that might be suitable for problems that have not been widely explored or alternative solutions to the development of the field.
We structure the paper as follows: Section 2 introduces formally the concept of DP with the main elements that are intrinsic to it. Section 3 encompasses the general framework of the paper by presenting the methodology applied for this research as well as the notations that will be used throughout the review. From Section 4 to Section 8, the papers regarding single machine, parallel machine, flow shop, job-shop and open shop environments are introduced in a concise manner, respectively. In addition, the subsections are distributed according to the objective functions that can be grouped due to their akin nature with considerations being provided at the end of each section. Section 9 encloses concluding remarks and the direction of DP regarding further studies in machine scheduling.
Access through your organization

Check access to the full text by signing in through your organization.
Section snippets
Dynamic programming
Whenever we conceive the idea of optimal solution, the first method that often rises is the explicit enumeration or brute force method, which can be thought of as counting over every possible solution a given system can provide. A variety of problems in Operations Research are formulated under a combinatorial nature (e.g. machine scheduling, TSP) and therefore, each different ordering represents a distinct combination that can be evaluated as optimum according to the value of the objective
Notations and methodology
This section is majorly part of the methodological comprehension that entails the motives related to the production of this paper. It has been divided into two subsections with the first one gathering the topics that justify the collection of articles that have been included in our research. The second subsection comprises the notations that are commonly known to the machine scheduling experts with regard to the environment, technological constraints and objective functions.
Single machine
Due to its simplicity when compared to other environments in scheduling, the variations that come with this problem are abundant regarding the constraints as well as the objective functions that present potential interest in manufacturing. Therefore, experimenting on a single machine and finding solutions to tackle variants related to it may have positive impact on developing adapted methods for far more complex systems. Among those solutions, dynamic programming has shown substantial
Parallel machines
Dynamic Programming has also contributed for an extensive list of solutions regarding the parallel machine environment. Several mathematical properties have been developed for this multi-machine scenario and this fact has enabled sole or combined methods relying on dynamic programming resources to be designed.
Flow shop
Flow shop scheduling has been an environment that, despite being far more complex compared to the ones previously outlined in this research, has received nearly undivided attention from most authors whose scheduling is a core theme and this interest can be traced back nearly to 70 years. Nevertheless, when seeking information on the contribution of dynamic programming in this environment, one can notice that only few authors have actually employed it as a primary or secondary method to solve
Job shop
Job shop scheduling has also been an environment which has been a target for researchers due to the establishment of different routes on distinct machines. Some studies have been developed since the sixties but contribution has grown quite moderately only in the eighties. Hence, when comparing the use of dynamic programming to other methods, there might not be numerous articles tying this method to such environment. In this section we outline these papers and, due to a shortage in the number of
Open shop
The randomness of the open shop environment has also turned this problem into one of the most interesting settings in machine scheduling, since its behavior can be considered an ordeal. Due to this fact, the use of exact methods in solving such method has been scarce or just theoretically conceived. Nevertheless, when verifying the application of dynamic programming in this scenario one can notice that an unexpected amount of papers concerning this topic might appear, which is surprising
Concluding remarks
DP is a method that, over the years, has been reinvented by the researchers in machine scheduling. Clearly it had to happen because of the drawbacks brought by the Curse of Dimensionality. These artifices used are usually adaptations made in order to make the original method more efficient and also in order to verify the adherence of DP to other methods, whether it is used as a primary tool or a secondary one.
The studies developed for the single machine environment have shown that DP has
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Edson Antônio Gonçalves de Souza: Conceptualization of this study, Text elaboration, Methodology, Review and Discussion. Marcelo Seido Nagano: Conceptualization of the study, Orientation, Text review. Gustavo Alencar Rolim: Search for additional articles, Text elaboration, Text review.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
